May is a relatively quiet time in the
agricultural calendar so Stewart and
expert charcoal burner dr. Malcolm
Stratford are going to try turning wood
into charcoal a valuable item in the
17th century what we've got is an open
lattice and we pack this with dry
material tinder bits of twigs bit of dry
bark you know little chippings we pack
it down the middle you then stack all
our proper wood around lit charcoal
burnings probably been going on
thousands of years to be quite honest in
the 17th century charcoal burning really
powered the beginnings of the Industrial
Revolution to turn wood into charcoal
rather than ash means building a special
wood stack around a central chimney
getting the flu just right is vital
charcoal has a lot of advantages it's a
lighter weight material and it's
virtually smoke free which means you can
burn it in a house for example in a
brazier without a chimney to take the
smoke away the other thing is it's a
much purer product it's basically just
carbon and therefore it can be used for
industrial processes like smelting I've
charcoal burning was a specialist craft
the professionals would travel from
place to place to play their trade the
charcoal burners in the 17th century
were almost a race apart a bit like the
Roman gypsies were who almost spoke
their own language lived quietly in the
woods interacted only with themselves
and almost nobody else it's curious that
you find no surnames that would indicate
charcoal burning as profession and you
find no wills or inventories for
charcoal burners and it indicates in a
bit of a way that they may well have
been just that much more divorced from
the whole normal system of life it may
be slow and laborious work but it's also
highly skilled requiring diligent
attention there's a lovely account in
one of the Icelandic sagas of the raff
and Kel saga I think where there was I
believe a man fell asleep while making
charcoal in all caught fire and that 80
square miles of forest was burnt down
woods left in Iceland so to the saga was
about who should pay for the damage the
chimney flue finished Malcolm and Stuart
can surround it with the wood they hope
to turn into charcoal in the 17th
century industry was on the rise and so
the need for charcoal was growing ever
greater Britain's woodlands were
devastated to meet demand by lunchtime
Stuart and Malcolm's stack of wood is
slowly disappearing beneath a layer of
Bracken and earth the whole purpose of
which is to make sure when you burn it
the air doesn't get through if you were
to let the air in at any time when the
charcoals hot before you know it you
would be enormous bonfire and if that
happens you get ash and of course no
charcoal it's like putting an enormous
fire blanket over the pile of burning
wood the absolutely vital to the process
it controls the flow of oxygen well that
looks fine to me I can't see any green
poking through
we just Pat it down with a shovel in a
minute we'll be fine once the charcoal
pile is complete it just needs a bucket
of embers to get it lit a small stack of
charcoal right this only takes a day to
build the biggest tax could involve up
to 30 where wagon loads of wood once
they're stacked all of them start in the
same way cook fire already just to top
it up a bit little bit more hot charcoal
in we go out a lot with the chimney lit
period sources recommend it should be
capped as quickly as possible with some
wood and a large piece of turf then a
close vigil needs to be kept while it
slowly smolders spread it round a little
bit not too tight at this stage
down in the woods it's difficult to know
how successful the charcoal burning has
been there's only one way to tell for
sure crack it open and see how much
charcoal is inside
oh good that's really brilliant stuff
there a fire is basically gone out and
the heaps cooled down there are few bits
that are still brown not black but this
isn't wasted all that would happen is a
real charcoal burner would take these
half burnt bits and put them straight
back into the next burn oh look at this
bit that's just beautiful there's no
much every soft these small domestic
heaps are going to be much less
efficient on the burn the big commercial
boys at the time would have been
producing much more efficiently they'd
have had maybe 90% plus of good charcoal
here
what's your 18 30 40 percent maybe even
50 50 you reckon yeah there's quite a
bit gone down between the sticks
the charcoal burning has been a
reasonable success I get some really
nice stuff coming out of here this
should be enough to fill at least a
couple of SEC's shilling a sackful which
was about a day's wages at the time some
charcoal burners of course had million
favor yet patience particularly the half
filling sacks with stones and earth
putting a bit of charcoal on the top and
then selling them off to the gullible
public